# The Pollard-Rho algorithm for finding discrete logarithm in GF(p)

*(if no solution exists, this program wil run foreverrrrrrr)*

## Introduction

Part **III.75** of the [trilogy](https://github.com/Mistsuu/BabyStepGiantStepC).

This is an algorithm that tries to find the solution to the following problem: Given `G` and `G^k mod p` with a known multiplicative **PRIME** order `n`, find `k`.

This repo is made for educational purposes, and for fun.

Utilizes **GMP version 6.2.1** and **xxhash version 0.8.1**.

## Usages

```
git clone https://github.com/Mistsuu/dlogC
cd dlogC
git checkout pollard-rho-Fp
make -j16
```

to produce `./dlog` and `so/libdlogfp.so`.

### Input supplying

To use `./dlog`, we supply input as a list of numbers seperated by a newline (`\n`) in the following format:

```
<p>
<G>
<G^k mod p>
<n>
```

⚠️ It is required that `n` must be **PRIME** in order for the algorithm to work, else the algorithm just spits out `None`.

### Customize your number of threads

You can run `./dlog -t <num_threads>` to specify the number of threads used in multithreading part. If not specified, the default value for `num_threads` is `4`. 

### Limit your memory

You don't need to because in this version, the memory usage is very minimal *(less than `1MB` is expected for most applications)*

### Some custom parameters

- `-a <alpha>`
This is a value that correlates to the proportion `theta = alpha * num_threads / sqrt(pi * N / 2)` of *"distinguished"* elements over total number of elements. Recommended to set to values in the form of `k * log2(n)` for `k` in `[2, 10]`. If `alpha` is set to `0` or leave empty, the default value is `3 * log2(n)`.

- `-r <nrandpoints>`
  Set up the number of random elements in Fp for the Pollard-Rho algorithm. You can experiment with this value, but any value from `20` and upper would work just as fine and won't affect much runtime. Default value is `20`.

### Output

The output will either be a number, or `None`, or some error data *(only happens in the case of memory error or thread creation error, which is not often as long as `n` is small enough that its square root fits 64-bits)*.

The program outputs `None` in the following cases:

- The program detects that no solution can be found *(but in a very very small case)*
- `n` is not a prime number or it is not positive.
- `num_threads` is `0`.
- `alpha` is too big.
- `nrandpoints` is `< 2`.

## Example

For example, to recover `k` from:

```python
G = 63848476900962761921955720089397765658257438572112067334361113887001094555500037
pow(G, k, p) = 124598459814481000866971099140174848414430762122941331126292491764551683720313014
p = 17524524814163177
```

where we know the order of the multiplicative group generated by `G` is `2259283924057529` using `4` threads.

We can run `./dlog -t 4` & supply the following input:

```
140601987068392810555209463610249011351761931006927193734529493874226799329006719
63848476900962761921955720089397765658257438572112067334361113887001094555500037
124598459814481000866971099140174848414430762122941331126292491764551683720313014
2259283924057529
```

Which gives the output:

```
814905979740757
```

If compiled with `BUILD=verbose` *(see the next section, **Compile modes**, for more detail)*, it will produce some outputs like this:

```
[debug] p: 
[debug]    140601987068392810555209463610249011351761931006927193734529493874226799329006719
[debug] G: 
[debug]    63848476900962761921955720089397765658257438572112067334361113887001094555500037
[debug] kG: 
[debug]    124598459814481000866971099140174848414430762122941331126292491764551683720313014
[debug] G_mult_order = 2259283924057529
[debug] n_threads = 4
[debug] n_rand_items = 100
[debug] tip: it is suggested that (alpha = k*52) for some small k.
[debug] index_size_limbs = 1
[debug] item_size_limbs = 5
[debug] alpha = 156
[debug] gamma = 49
[debug] n_hash_items = 628
[debug] n_distmod = 970039
[debug] Collision found!
[debug] The result is not correct!? Running cycle detection again...
[debug] Collision found!
[debug] The result is not correct!? Running cycle detection again...
[debug] Collision found!
[debug] Finished. Found k = 814905979740757
814905979740757
```

You can see some input examples provided in the `examples/` folder.

## Compile modes

Running `make`, you can specify `BUILD` variable to `release`, `verbose`, `memcheck`, `static` which creates different kind of builds:

- `release`: Using `dlog` will produce no debug output. *(default)*
- `verbose`: Using `dlog` will produce debug output.
- `memcheck`: Which just compiles the code with `-fsanitize=address`. Helpful in looking for memory leaks in the code.
- `static`: Creates a static version of `release` build of `dlog`.
- `allwarn`: If you want to compile with a lot of error displaying 🥰

You can also run `make libdlogfp` to build `so/libdlogfp.so` that you can use with the `so/dlog_Fp.py` *(but it gets a very weird bug that if you run the function `discrete_log_Fp()` a-lot, suddenly there's a bottleneck that cause the code to run much slower...)*

## How it works

I just give a link here because I know people can do it much better than me. The link I provided has very good formulas, explanations that can satisfy your satisfaction. The keyword to Google search is `Pollard-rho for discrete logarithm`.

- [Random Walks Revisited: Extensions of
  Pollard’s Rho Algorithm for Computing
  Multiple Discrete Logarithms](https://ac.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/publications/publications/sac01.pdf)

I use Teske's random function and apply Brent cycle-finding algorithm mentioned in this paper.

## Optimization

*(i'm lazy so I just copy the description from the `pollard-rho` branch... please don't hit me if i'm wrong some part :()*

### Reduce mod `p` optimization

I decided to put numbers in [Montgomery form](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Montgomery_modular_multiplication) to do arithmetics with them. It helps me in a lot of ways.

Normally when you do `a*b mod p`, you have to do:

- `X = a*b`
- then `Y = X mod p`

However, the `mod` operation is so expensive that you can basically replace it with `3` multiplications and `1` subtraction and it will have less runtime. The Montgomery form allows you to do a map:

```
(a*R mod p), (b*R mod p) -> (a*b*R mod p)
```

where `R` is some random number you choose. While this map still requires you to do `mod`, but now it's in `mod R` instead of `mod p`. If you choose `R` to be `2^n` then `mod R` is just an `and` operation and that's how you save time baby 🤑🤑🤑!!! Better, if you choose `R` to be `mp_bits_per_limb` times the number of `mp_limb_t`s of `p`, you can just omit the fit limbs 😊

In the algorithm, most of the runtime is dedicated to multiply 2 numbers mod `p`. So optimize it => Algorithm speedup.

That's the first reason. The second reason is that after every arithmetic operations (`*`, `+`, `-`), the result always has the same number of `mp_limb_t`s as the inputs, which means that I don't have to keep track the number of limbs for each operation to allocate the right amount of memory for the variables. And also I can just write some Python code to automatically generate the C code for that part *(yey automation)*

### Multithreading

If we have `t` threads running at the same time applying the `Pollard-Rho` algorithm independently, we will have a speedup of `sqrt(t)` times. If the threads can communicate with each other, we will have a speed up of `t` times. That's what I (try) to do in this code, multi-threading and making them communicate with each other. 

During the old implementations, I decided to go with the route where the threads can communicate with each other, but it seems like that will cause *many reads, one write* situation. While I decided there's no lock mechanism to be used here and therefore, allowing some misreads, it turns out that this situation still triggers some locks on memory read on the atomic level, and the program does not scale well with the number of threads increasing :<

Refer back to the amazing paper, *[Random Walks Revisited: Extensions of Pollard’s Rho Algorithm for Computing Multiple Discrete Logarithms](https://ac.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/publications/publications/sac01.pdf)*, it seems like we can mimimalize the lock problem, by hashing elements and store the related details in a hash table. If there's a hash collision, we've likely found an answer.

However, a hash table requires some memory to be allocated. In practice, a typical computer cannot create the hash table big enough, in turn limits the size of the hash and collisions will occur too frequent. Because the hash output doesn't represent the whole input, many different elements can be hashed into the same value. The lower the size of the hash, the higher the probability of finding false positives, which hinder the process even worse.

It turns out the aforementioned paper has a very elegant solution *(✨ the solution that you can just say moaahhh ✨)* to keeping ***BOTH*** the size of the hash table ***AND*** the number of false positive cases **very low**.

This problem can be solved if we only hash elements that satisfy some constraints that we created *(in the paper they're called the "distinguished elements")*, and check for collisions in those cases only. While at first glance, it seems like many possible equal values will be missed, but trust me, the math checks out. In this implementation, to determine if an element is a distinguished one, I just check whether the first limb of the element modulo some number equals 0. *(yeah that's it)*